[SWISHING SOUND]
[MUSICAL TONES]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Whenever you find
yourself encountering division,
whenever you observe yourself
feeling isolated or needing
to withdraw from the people
or the situations around you,
Native American
author Anita Sanchez
invites you to remember,
there is another way to live.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
And joining me is Anita Sanchez
to share her four sacred gifts.
They guide us to live
as one human race,
as our ancestors and our
elders have taught us to live.
Hello.
>>ANITA SANCHEZ: Hello, Lisa.
>>LISA: You're amazing.
You have this 40-year history
of organizational development
in the corporate world.
And yet, you have this
great deep history
in the Native American arts.
Tell me a little bit
about your corporate life.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- well, I
knew from a little girl
that I was going to grow
up and connect people
all over the world.
I didn't know it was corporate.
I'm the first one in my family
to be involved in corporations.
And so-- yes, for 42 years--
I just celebrated-- I've
had my own business.
And I go in.
And I consult from the
C-suite to newbies coming in.
And it's basically sharing about
how to work and live together--
how to really appreciate each
other's gifts-- the differences
as well as the similarities.
>>LISA: That's so needed.
So were you the first in
your family to get a PhD
and to go to that level
of schooling as well?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, I was first
in quite a few things.
So yes, definitely, I'm a first
generation to go to college
and then going on to get my
master's-- and first to get
a PhD.
And I have 120
first cousins, so--
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- so when I go
back for reunions and that,
I'm always reminded.
And some of them, I
don't even know anymore.
They're the kids' kids.
And they're like,
you let me know
that I could go and do this.
You were the one.
So it's amazing responsibility.
But I'll tell you,
it's a much bigger joy.
It's so wonderful.
>>LISA: It must be, to
inspire generations.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- yes.
>>LISA: That's incredible--
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: --Dr. Anita.
So tell me a little
bit about that.
42 years ago, you
started your own business
as a Native American
Mexican-American woman.
How was that?
>>SANCHEZ: Well, I had
a lot of disbelievers.
Some of the faculty, when I
said what I was going to do--
not all of them, but
some of them were like--
and I know they were coming
out of their own story,
as we all do.
And that's why it's
really important
to listen to each other, to
expand our stories and find out
there's another possibility.
Anyway, they said,
you can't do that.
What do you mean, you're going
to go and work internationally?
I said, no, that's
what I'm going to do.
And they're like, no, no, no.
You go to other colleges, other
universities than Colorado,
so that you can get
a faculty position.
Because a Mexican and
Native American woman
is not going to own
her own business
and travel all over the world.
Well, I'm 23.
And I'm traveling.
I find myself in
Singapore, working
with women whose countries
are at war with each other,
doing visionaring work
and peace and development.
I'm in corporations-- Hewlett
Packard, Dupont, AT&T.
The list goes on.
And-- yeah.
>>LISA: What would you do?
What would you do
when you get there?
>>SANCHEZ: Well, you always
contract with the executives.
And I remember, one of my
first ones, sitting there.
At that point, I think it was
26 in this particular client I'm
thinking of.
And I'm sitting there.
And he's looking at me.
He goes, I knew
you were a woman.
I knew from your name,
you're probably Mexican.
You look Native American.
But you're so young.
What are you going to teach me?
And I remember looking at
him and saying, I don't know.
Do you want to find out?
And he just was like, yes--
yes, let's stay.
>>LISA: My goodness.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, but I teach
them all sorts of things--
of how to build effective teams,
how to go inside and find out
what really is your purpose--
what it is that
really is calling you.
Because there's
all sorts of crises
in corporations-- in any
business, whatever size it is.
But when you're clear about
your vision and your purpose,
when you know what's
being called--
and that can shift over time--
you're able to
move through those.
>>LISA: So you go
into environments
where there is a need for
organizational development
and consulting.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: So there's usually
something that's broken.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes,
there usually is.
Usually-- because
one of my big loves
is diversity and inclusion.
So it's generally, oh,
we're losing the women.
We're losing the Black folks.
We can't attract the Latinos.
Oh my-- and they're
expanding all over the world.
So how do we get them
to work with each other
across the differences.
And mostly, they're racial,
gender, sexual orientation--
but they move beyond that
too into what I would call--
it's more subtle, but
ever so presence--
which is the differences
in world views, which
makes it or breaks
it of whether it's
going to be easy
to dance together,
to make those profits, to
obtain and exceed those goals.
>>LISA: And often, there
is history attached to it--
decades, generational
history that's
attached to these
different perspectives.
How do you address that
to bring everyone together
for a greater whole?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- well,
first, you listen.
You allow-- you welcome it.
So I remember, in
the early days--
it's going to date
me a little bit--
but when I would go
into corporations
and I would get the contract,
they'd go, before we sign now,
there's two things
you can never do here.
You have to agree.
I'd go, well, what are those?
And they'd repeat
those for decades.
You can't talk about politics.
These are US international
corporations.
You can't talk about politics.
And you can't talk
about religion.
And I would say, fine.
I don't need to talk about
politics, although we can
have those side conversations.
But when you say religion, I
think people confuse things.
I will always deal
with spirituality.
We all come in with spirit.
We choose religions.
I can not talk about
religion, but I can't not
talk about spirituality.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: And I'd
lose some contracts.
So some of my colleagues
go, why did you do that?
Those were big!
And I'd be like,
because if I'm there
to help them become
whole, effective, then
I can't cut out a
whole piece of--
>>LISA: You-- who you are.
>>SANCHEZ: --this
other being, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: And who I
am-- so it wouldn't work.
But it changed.
By 2002, I never
heard that again.
And in those who
did bring it up,
I'd say what I just said to you.
And they'd go, OK.
So things are changing--
>>LISA: That's great to know.
>>SANCHEZ: --to understand
we're spiritual beings too.
Yes, we're physical,
mental, emotional.
But this spirit is
really critical.
>>LISA: Now, you didn't just
learn this from going to school
and getting your PhD.
>>SANCHEZ: No.
>>LISA: Tell me a little
bit about your family,
your background.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, well,
I was really fortunate.
In growing up, being
part indigenous--
Aztecan-- maternal
grandmother is Aztecan.
And so she would always--
from a little girl, I remember
doing ceremony and just
wonderful things
about understanding
that we're spirit.
But we're spirit--
we're reinforced
by connection to everything.
I have to tell you.
It just popped up for me.
One of the things
that I loved so much
was, when we were all
little-- a bunch of us--
and we were playing
outside all day
long-- she got us
up really early.
And as soon as the sun
hit those sunflowers,
we stood over there.
And she had to stand there for
a while-- like, five minutes.
We were little, so we
couldn't stand too long.
And then we'd play.
And then, I think, it must
have been every hour or so.
She would come out.
And we'd turn.
And that day, I
experienced what it
was to be connected
to a sunflower--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANCHEZ: --to understand,
no matter what was happening
in the day--
whether I fell down or
somebody was fussy or everybody
was having fun-- that you
can always look to the sun.
And so that kind of
understanding or listening
to yourself but
also understanding
the spiritual connection to the
earth, as well, was so power--
and there's so many
experiences like that.
>>LISA: Oh, how class--
>>SANCHEZ: And yeah--
so it's wonderful.
>>LISA: Now, the kids
are staring at the phones
and so forth.
And they've lost that touch,
that connection with nature
so much.
>>SANCHEZ: And that's part
of what, definitely, we
need to bring back.
I'm not giving up my cell phone.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: I'm not
giving up my computer.
However, I was actually at
Google Singularity University.
>>LISA: Oh, really.
>>SANCHEZ: And this
popped out of my mouth.
So I'm going to go ahead and
say it, since it's already
sort of public anyway.
And I looked at this crowd.
And they brought up
this whole thing.
And I said, well, you know,
you can't Google wisdom.
And there was a silence.
And then everybody
started laughing.
And I said, you
understand what I mean?
You can Google it.
And it'll give you a definition.
But wisdom doesn't
come that way.
So put the phones down.
Put the computers down,
for little bits of time.
And reconnect with yourself
first and then with nature
and other two-leggeds and--
yeah.
So I had a lot of experiences
like that little--
with sage elders and mainly
my Aztecan grandmother.
But I don't want to make it
sound like it was all rosy.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: It was wonderful.
And at the same time,
there was a dark secret
that I was keeping in my life of
years of sexual abuse from age
4 to 13.
So that--
>>LISA: That is def--
>>SANCHEZ: --was also there too.
>>LISA: That is a topic that
I want to dive into with you.
First of all, I want you to
take a look at Anita's journey,
from the corporate culture
to her wonderful wisdom
from her elders.
Take a look at this to
understand the story
a little bit better.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[FLUTE MUSIC]
- My kindergarten teacher
asked, what are you
going to be when you grow up?
Here, draw it.
My friends stood holding
drawings of firemen, doctors,
mommies.
I knew what I was going
to be when I grew up.
From my dreams, I saw people
connecting their hands
and hearts, circling the earth.
Everyone laughed.
But I knew, this is what I was
going to be when I grew up.
As an adult, I was
living that dream,
filled with lots of
experiences and connections
to people all over the world.
I earned my PhD and was
training and coaching
leaders and their teams,
bringing their minds and hearts
together.
But after many years,
my favorite executives
who championed women and
men of different backgrounds
began to ask, why
am I doing this?
It hit me like a rock.
It echoed what I
was feeling inside.
In 1995, I found
elders to talk to,
while volunteering at
the American Indian
Science and Engineering
Society's annual conference.
I asked them, what am
I supposed to be doing?
Should I be doing
something else?
On the second night
of the conference,
we all gathered to
receive special gifts that
came from the North,
South, East, and West.
Remember, Grandmother and
Grandfather make no mistakes.
We each have a role to play.
We are all part of
one Mother, one Earth.
We have been living in a
time of a great winter.
And now, we must
prepare for the spring.
There was silence.
Then he began naming the
four gifts for all humanity,
to help prepare ourselves
and our communities.
From the North-- the power
to forgive the unforgivable.
From the West--
the power of unity.
From the East-- the
gift of healing.
From the South--
the gift of hope.
Afterwards, I saw Henrietta
and another elder, Phil
Lane, Senior.
I don't have all
the answers, do I?
No, Anita.
You think that the worst that
has ever happened to our people
was to have been murdered and
to have our sacred land stolen.
You are wrong.
The worst thing that can happen
to our people or to any people
is to lose hope.
Her words were like
a spear of truth
that hit and opened my heart.
Those Four Gifts
have supported me
through good times
and tough times.
Forgiving my parents
healed the little girl
who was abused by my
father from age 4 to 13.
I replaced the hurt and shame
with gratitude to my parents
for giving me life.
[END PLAYBACK]
So let's talk about that.
You had experienced this
love-hate relationship
with your father, kind of.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, well, and--
>>LISA: Let's talk about it.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, and so
that's so important,
in terms of, it taught me
one of these gifts that we'll
be getting into,
which is forgiveness,
because I know a lot about that.
So yes, from age 4 to 13, I
was molested by my father.
And I kept silent about it.
There were wonderful
people and different times
that I could have
said something.
And I stayed silent.
>>LISA: Why?
>>SANCHEZ: For fear--
I think, multiple layers.
For fear that I
would lose my family.
My brothers and sisters and my
mom were so important to me.
And I didn't know
what would happen.
He did say that,
if I kept quiet,
he wouldn't bother
my younger sister.
But that was a lie,
because later--
later-- so there was that.
There was shame--
a lot of shame,
like, that other people probably
weren't experiencing anything
like this.
And so it was like, oh my gosh.
I had to keep this secret.
And it only really end--
I can't even own that
it was me, growing
and becoming more
mature and understanding
that this was about my freedom.
But my father was
murdered when I was 13.
And he was mistaken--
it was racial.
So it kind of fits
with what's continuing
to happen in this country.
But he went for a
beer after work.
And early that day, a white man
and a black man, in the '60s,
were having an argument.
The white man returned and
saw my father sitting there
and fired two bullets
through his head
and killed him on
the spot, thinking--
>>LISA: Thinking it
was the other man.
>>SANCHEZ: Thinking
it was the other man.
And you can imagine--
a 13-year-old-- I was dealing
with both the sadness that, oh,
my gosh, my--
and at the same time,
there were times
that I wished that
he were gone--
the unthinkable.
>>LISA: When you heard that
news, what did you feel?
>>SANCHEZ: Well, when the
police came to the door,
I was with my mom.
And they invited themselves in.
And I remember them
saying, Mrs. Sanchez, there
was an accident that happened.
And do you know anyone who
would want to harm your husband?
And I remember, in my
head, thinking, oh my gosh.
I wanted-- I wanted him gone.
And then they told
what had happened,
how he had been killed and
the circumstances of it.
And I remember, at that point,
just all these different
things-- confusion, I think,
is the biggest thing--
fear, sadness, confusion,
wanting to support my mom.
And it wasn't until years
later that I realized,
when I did talk to my mom,
when I confronted her,
at 21, that we both realized
that we were experiencing
some of the same
things in that moment.
Because she didn't know, but
she had a sense something
was not right with him.
And it makes sense, so it was--
>>LISA: At that moment--
>>SANCHEZ: --a hard thing.
>>LISA: --your father left.
Your violator left.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- yes.
>>LISA: So did you start to
feel, in any way, a little bit
more freedom?
Or did you hold onto that--
>>SANCHEZ: Well, no-- no.
>>LISA: --for a long time?
>>SANCHEZ: And so this is an
important part of the story
too that lots of people
don't get to hear.
But I thought, it would be--
I would now be able to be free.
This is what I wanted.
But the mind-- so all the
images and things continued.
So I did do what, unfortunately,
is still on the rise
everywhere in the world,
which is teen suicide--
suicide, period,
actually-- adults now, too.
So at about six months
after his death,
I thought I was going to end
it, because it just felt like--
the images aren't gone.
And I still hadn't
told anybody about it.
And luckily-- fortunately--
I feel like-- oh,
Spirit was with me--
I took aspirins-- a lot of them.
And it didn't work.
It's kind of absurd in a way.
I remember just
thinking it all out
and putting a trash can by the
bed, because my two sisters
and I shared a room.
And I thought, oh,
I don't want to make
a mess for them and stuff.
It was like, what are
you talking about?
Just--
>>LISA: Uh-huh, you're
out of your right mind.
>>SANCHEZ: --as a child.
But I appreciate you
asking about this
and bringing it up
because, again, I
think what happens-- what's
happened in our society is
we're not talking about things.
We're just going into being
divided or paralysis, ignorance
or ignoring.
And what we really need
to do is come together
about what really is happening.
>>LISA: Yes-- yes.
I get very frustrated
with the news when
it reports on the events of--
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: --the gymnastics coach
and how many girls came forward
and how many--
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: --years he
was able to get away
with that, after so many parents
were told by their children.
And there were lawsuits.
And he continued.
And the same with
the USC doctor.
But I think, it is
journalistically
irresponsible for the news
to report on these subjects
and move to the
next story and not--
>>SANCHEZ: I agree.
>>LISA: --to give solutions.
I would like you to
take this opportunity
to help us understand
what to do.
In hindsight, what would you
tell that 13-year-old you?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- yes.
Well, first, I
would have to say,
part of self-love
and acceptance,
which is a process of
forgiving yourself and healing,
is that I wouldn't tell her
that she did anything wrong--
that I understand you did that.
However, what I did, in the
process, begin to understand--
as I laid there writhing
and vomiting and stuff,
I, all of a sudden,
saw my grandparents,
my Aztecan grandmother.
I saw the rocking chair that
my grandfather made for me.
And he only made two
of them in his life,
for two of his grandkids.
And he had many.
And I realized, at that
moment, oh, please--
please, whatever--
let me stay here.
I did exactly what
my elders had been
teaching me is that
illusion of separateness.
So in my pain, I believed
that I was alone.
No one's ever alone.
So I would say that-- and I
say that everywhere I go--
>>LISA: Of course.
>>SANCHEZ: --is that none
of us are ever alone.
We do feel lonely at times.
That's the human condition.
>>LISA: Different.
>>SANCHEZ: But
we're never alone--
ever.
Even if you weren't here
with me, I wouldn't be--
I'm breathing.
Those trees did something.
Those plants-- that ocean--
to have that sun shining--
you always have someone.
And there were so many people
who tried to reach out,
who understood something
else was going on.
And I just didn't
take their hand,
because I just believed
that I was lost
in the illusion of the pain.
And when people are in pain,
they do need something else,
whether it's a spiritual
link, whether it's
another human being.
It can be an animal, a pet.
It can be nature.
Whatever it is, all of
those things are here.
All those good medicines
are here for us.
And we need to just get present.
But I'll tell you, the
biggest thing for me
that happened, really, was
I started college at 16.
And then I got a
scholarship to come out
to the University of Colorado.
And I felt like I got out
of a desert into this oasis.
There were so many
indigenous people here and so
many Mexicans here than
where I grew up in Missouri.
And I just had all these people,
like, shining a mirror on me,
saying, wow.
You're wonderful.
And you can do this.
And again, never saying
anything about the truth
of the other part of my life.
And you know what?
That began to help
me lower what I
call my shield, my
armor of separateness.
And it started coming down--
not real fast.
But it started coming down.
And then I realized, part
of why we need to heal,
we need to speak of this,
have it acknowledged,
do all the work is
because of love of self.
You can't receive it, unless
you've loved yourself.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: And it's so
huge when you realize that.
>>LISA: But do you know
what happens when you
speak of this to another woman?
They say, me too.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, they do.
I've had lots say
that to me over--
the decades that I've worked in
the corporations, those women
there, as well as women
in the communities,
as well as women in warring
countries-- it's all over.
>>LISA: Yes-- yes.
And I think-- I feel--
that this period of
#MeToo has to be brought
about into the awareness
of the universal culture,
in order to begin the healing.
And I think, it's going to
last for a little while--
>>SANCHEZ: It is.
>>LISA: --before
the healing begins--
>>SANCHEZ: It is.
Well, I think--
>>LISA: --unfortunately.
>>SANCHEZ: --what
we have to allow
is for it to happen in
all its diverse ways.
However, the voice coming out
so strong-- it makes me happy.
It seems horrible to
say, happy about that--
not happy about the violence.
The violence needs to end.
But the only way it's going
to end is by us speaking of it
and having allies-- have
men too, who said, no, no.
But it's for women supporting
other women, instead of saying,
don't talk about that--
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: --instead
saying, thank you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Yes, and that art
of bringing awareness to it
and vocalizing, in a safe
space, in a way that it's
very supported, that
you can feel safe.
Safety is the most important
part of awareness and speaking
about it.
But when that happens,
in that safe environment,
the healing can start to begin.
And we also train
the entire culture
of how women should be treated,
how men should be treated.
I think there's a
lot of confusion
now amongst how men speak
to women and vice versa.
I saw this poll that came
out about men and women
in the workplace.
And there was about 80 polled.
And most of the
anonymous comments were--
a man says, I don't
speak to a woman
alone any longer unless
another person is present.
I will not hug anyone
in the workplace.
I keep everything limited
to no physical contact,
before or after work.
So it's all changing.
But there aren't any
real solutions yet.
What do you feel about that?
>>SANCHEZ: Well, that's
a natural action,
because the men
are really trying
to protect themselves too.
>>LISA: Sure, of course.
>>SANCHEZ: So it's
really a natural thing.
But they will move through it.
I've seen that happen in
corporations where, initially,
when it became clear
about no harassment--
this is going to be a
no-tolerance zone for any kind
of mistreatment and stuff--
but the healing-- we
are men and women.
We have some differences.
But I will say, from
indigenous elders,
from different traditions
all over the world,
we are also very much alike.
And for us to be connected, to
understand that we are spirit,
we're energy, we're
physical bodies--
all that stuff.
But to really be connected, then
we need to engage each other.
And so to stay in
that space won't work.
So four things I
found, as I listened
to elders all over the world--
to be able to heal that,
to heal our relationship--
it's not just with each
other as men and women--
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: --but it's actually
with ourselves-- is that we
need these four elements.
And there's lots of different
ways they go about them.
But the four elements
are listening--
we need to listen, not speak.
That means, no talking.
Listen to what's going
on inside yourself.
And then listen to others.
Listen to nature.
Listen-- big one.
Listening is not nothing.
Listening is something.
>>LISA: Active listening.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: --really
being present.
And then the second thing is to
have supportive relationships.
So no one's asking someone
to be in a situation that's
not respectful, where you're
not being treated with dignity.
So we need to look for those
supportive relationships.
However, we think
supportive relationships
are all about just being
comfortable, are all about--
oh, I'm only going
to talk to you, Lisa,
if you totally agree with me.
Well, that's absurd!
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: So people
who care about you--
the third thing is
unconditional love.
And some people, when I say
that one, that I found that,
they go--
a lot of people
don't believe too
much in unconditional love--
maybe a mother to her child
or a father to a child.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: The reality
is, unconditional love
is really critical.
And when you discover
that, no matter what,
you are unconditionally loved--
because just by virtue of being
part of this hoop of life--
that is an incredible
power source for you.
>>LISA: Wow!
It gets rid of judgment.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, and
the fourth thing--
which is why I love
and appreciate you
having me here-- is
that it's about getting
into positive action.
All this things
arising right now--
we're all making choices.
We think, oh, I'm
staying out of that.
Your silence is a choice.
You're speaking out.
How you do that is a choice.
We're all impacting.
And so this awareness
that's expanding all over,
not allowing anything
uncovered, is an important time.
And from prophecies in
different parts of the world,
we're in that time.
And it's a time to lead from
our hearts, to be aware,
to use all of those things.
And it's a particularly--
no matter if the ceremony is
coming from South Africa,
Alaska, Aboriginals, women--
all of them are saying,
women, it is our time to rise.
It is not about doing in men
or not having them be there.
>>LISA: No.
>>SANCHEZ: It is our turn.
It is our time to
bring back into balance
the masculine and the feminine.
That's what--
>>LISA: Is that what
the prophecy says?
>>SANCHEZ: That's what
the prophecies say.
And they say them
in different ways,
in different parts of the world.
>>LISA: In different cultures.
>>SANCHEZ: But they're all
rising at the same time.
>>LISA: The rise
of the feminine.
>>SANCHEZ: The rise
>>LISA: I love
this idea of unity.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: And we have,
actually, a clip of your uncle
talking to you about and
teaching about this very thing.
And I want you to see this clip.
And we'll come back and
talk with Anita about it.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- When I was 6-years-old, oh,
how I loved being squeezed
into our old blue Plymouth, with
my five brothers and sisters
and my mom and dad.
Every year, we'd
go several times.
We drive out of Kansas
City, into the countryside,
to visit my special relatives.
We'd pull up in front of
my aunt and uncle's house,
with its white wooded siding.
And even before we entered,
I could smell the food--
the potatoes, the
flatbread, the beans.
Oh!
My family hugs a lot.
So we had to hug everybody
before we went outside to play.
But what I remember most
was, late in the afternoon,
coming back inside and
sitting in a circle,
in order to listen to
my uncle share stories
about how we were all
connected to one another.
He would lower his eyes.
We would all lean forward.
And then, with this calm yet
strong voice, he would say,
this is what it means to
be a whole human being,
to live knowing that
we are all connected.
We are all one.
And then he would
make a huge circle.
And in that circle, he
would place the people.
And he would say, we are
part of all the people,
from the red, brown, black,
white, and yellow direction.
We are part of the Earth--
the water, the
animals, the birds--
all the elements.
We are part of Spirit--
Grandmother and Grandfather.
There are no mistakes.
Everyone and everything
has a place in this circle.
We knew to be quiet, to not miss
a word of what my uncle said.
And then he'd look
each of us in the eyes.
And he's say, now, if
you hurt another person
with your thoughts,
words, or actions,
you not only hurt that person,
you hurt all the people,
the Earth, and the Spirit.
And if you hurt the Earth
by polluting the water,
you not only hurt the water.
You hurt all the Earth,
the Spirit, and the people.
And if you hurt the Spirit by
not honoring the sacredness
and connection of all
life, then you hurt,
also, the people and the Earth.
To be a whole human being
means to live in harmony
and connection with all life.
Believe me, if you were in
that circle, you'd be saying--
just like I did--
I don't ever want to
hurt a person, the Earth,
or the Spirit.
Afterwards, we'd all sit
down and eat and enjoy
this delicious food.
And then, sleepily,
we'd get back in the car
and go back to the city.
As a kid, I thought everybody
had aunts and uncles,
grandparents-- the
elders who taught
us these important
instructions of life.
But as an adult, I
learned it was different.
For you see, my uncle was
Native American, indigenous
to this land--
Osage-- a wise and loving elder.
And I realized how blessed I
was to have him in my life.
And it would be a blessing
to have him today.
Why?
Because today, way
too often, we act
as if we have no connections.
We act as if we
have no relations.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>SANCHEZ: Thank you.
I love seeing my
messages from my uncle.
I just love it.
He's been gone for some time.
But he's not.
He's in here.
>>LISA: He is-- yes.
>>SANCHEZ: It's just wonderful.
>>LISA: You had such
incredible teachers.
And what he was just
saying is unity.
He talks about unity, which is a
part of the four sacred gifts--
forgiveness-- the
ability to forgive,
which we talked a
little bit about.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, and
the power of unity--
the unity is going
to take all of us.
Because as he said, the
hoop of life is everything.
We're so used to-- in
our modern science,
we've just separated,
separated, separated.
And it's not just in science.
In so many things, we've
just separated, separated.
And it's to love all of
that, because all of that's
in the hoop of life.
But it's in the hoop
and life, understanding
that we're all connected.
And so when you have
that world view--
I love it when I go
into a corporate room
and I have clients who--
like, they get it.
Oh, yeah, it is all connected.
It makes it so much simpler.
Because to have to get rid of
that illusion of separateness--
>>LISA: Separateness-- yeah.
>>SANCHEZ: And all
the science now--
whether you have physics,
biology-- it's all showing,
we're so connected.
And--
>>LISA: Isn't that great?
Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah!.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: And the
elders were telling us
that since we were little.
In fact, they would say,
be careful of what you say.
Be careful of what you
think, because you're already
affecting, by
having that go out.
It goes out.
Well, now, we have
HeartMath and other sciences
showing that we are
impacting each other.
>>LISA: But what is the Lakota
phrase of all my relations?
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah,
[SPEAKING LAKOTA]---- yes--
all my relations.
We're all related.
And if we come from that,
it's a responsibility.
But it's incredible power.
And as a little
girl, I felt that.
But, like-- wow!
When they said that--
like, I'm really powerful.
Then I'd like-- oh, with
power comes responsibility.
Because if I'm not kind
to you or to the Earth,
then I've broken that unity.
>>LISA: Wow!
You were taught that as a child.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah-- yeah, so--
>>LISA: That's fantastic.
Yeah, let's talk a little
bit about responsibility
to the Earth.
And you are a major part
of the Pachamama Alliance.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, I love--
so Pachamama-- when people
hear that word, especially
in this country, they
think of Mother Earth,
which is wonderful.
But Pachamama is
actually a Quichoa word.
And it means the sacred
presence of the Earth, the sky,
the universe, and all time.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, so when
we talk about Pachamama,
that's holding that world
view of it is all connected.
And so it makes me really
excited and happy about that.
And so Pachamama is
one of the places
that I give a lot of my time,
because they have really
honored the sacred wisdom.
They draw on that
from the Amazon,
where I'm about to go in
a couple of weeks and--
>>LISA: Nice.
>>SANCHEZ: --get really
immersed into understanding
that we are part of the Earth.
The earth is part of us.
>>LISA: But there's a lot
of devastation happening
with our Earth, Anita.
>>SANCHEZ: There is.
>>LISA: From the fracking
to the drilling, of course,
as you know, our
environment, our ozone--
it is being rolled back.
>>SANCHEZ: It is.
And it's really important.
Mother Earth--
Pachamama is letting
us know all the ways
in which we have not
treated her with dignity,
treated ourselves with dignity.
And that's where all
of this is connected.
Because if, as a
human being, I'm
not treating another
with dignity and then
I'm not treating the Earth--
it all needs to be addressed.
So I thank you.
I thank the people
who are watching.
Whatever part of this sacred
hoop that you are addressing,
it's important.
But equally important
is to understand--
you may care more
about the animals.
Others may be
addressing children.
Others may be getting rid of
violence-- but to understand,
it's all connected.
It's all about all our
relations coming back
into harmony and balance
with one another.
We get to do that in our time.
What a great time to live!
>>LISA: We get to.
But there's also organizations
that are doing the opposite.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, there are.
>>LISA: So how does it
work in your community
where you have to
hold the space,
where there are
devastating things that
are happening at the same
time you're holding the space?
How do you make
that voice louder?
>>SANCHEZ: OK, so I
think a perfect example
of that was a recent one,
which was Standing Rock.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: And Standing Rock was
about coming in a spirit way,
standing for the water,
for all human beings,
not just for the people
there in the Dakotas,
but for all beings--
to re-bring that awareness
that water is sacred.
So it's standing for.
And so that means that one does
it, not doing the same thing
back-- violence.
But it also doesn't
mean doing nothing.
It means that you do
this in a way that
is respectful-- dignity,
relationship with one another
and the Earth.
So that means you do get
active, in whatever way that
makes sense to you--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: --politically,
socially, in your family,
in yourself.
It's about action.
That GPS does not
work unless we move.
We got to move.
>>LISA: That's true.
That's true.
>>SANCHEZ: It's no going
to tell you, oh, I'm
off-course or on-course.
You've got to move.
>>LISA: Did it work though?
Did the people standing--
what were the results?
>>SANCHEZ: OK, so
yes and not totally.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SANCHEZ: What did work is that
not only the young women who
started running and started
bring the awareness about
the sacred water--
it attracted all
these elders from all
over-- not only the
US-- all over the world.
But it began deepening
a movement that
started in the
heart of the Amazon,
which was the Rights of Nature.
So Ecuador-- I'm digressing.
But Rights of Nature--
the first country
in the Earth who has the
Rights of Natures is Ecuador.
OK?
So now, we have Standing
Rock saying, water is sacred.
From that positive experience in
Ecuador and then Standing Rock
and people coming together--
indigenous and non-indigenous--
has spurred on a movement
all over the world
of Rights of Natures.
So we have cities in Europe.
We have cities in our country.
>>LISA: What is that--
>>SANCHEZ: We have
other countries saying--
>>LISA: --Rights of Nature?
>>SANCHEZ: Rights
of Nature-- that
is saying that that water,
that river, has a right to be.
It has a right to be present,
for the sake of itself
and for all life
that it supports.
So it comes right out
of indigenous wisdom.
We have a thing called
Seven Generations.
Now, each generation
is about 100 years.
And it actually got encode
in the Iroquois Nation.
And what that became
so important--
and it's held by other
indigenous people,
other parts of world--
was that everything
I think, everything I do,
I think of it's impact
not just now but at least seven
generations going forward.
So whatever I do, I'm thinking
about not only your daughter
but your daughter's daughter,
your daughter's daughter,
that river, and the
tributaries, and all of it.
And when we operate, thinking
that-- instead of short-term,
greed, results--
that kind of thing--
then we're shifting.
And people are realizing that.
They're starting to look at--
fracking?
Well, wait a minute.
Yes, we need energy.
And that's all of us.
We point fingers at each other.
When you point at
somebody else, you're
pointing three back at
yourself, because we're all
responsible for this.
However, they're starting
to see, well, wait a minute.
But it used this much water.
Wait a minute.
It's toxic.
They say it's safe.
But it's right
next to our schoo--
so it's all getting unraveled.
And that's why people
are really looking
to wisdom in themselves, in
nature, and to the wisdom
keepers of these
various traditions who
held onto these for thousands
of years for all of us.
>>LISA: Thank god.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes, and the voices
are being heard more.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Before it was just an
Erin Brockovich or someone.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: But now, there are
many Erin Brockoviches.
>>SANCHEZ: There are many.
>>LISA: And we're all being
heard in a way that has--
I think, because of the
power of social media.
>>SANCHEZ: It's true.
And see, that's why we
don't even want to--
we separate, like, oh, get rid
of that technology and this.
Or we're going to depend
only on technology.
Forget about people.
You can do whatever you
want, because techno--
that's more separation.
We need to work this together.
But yeah, social media--
people wouldn't know
what was going on
unless we have social media.
>>LISA: Yeah, there was a movie
or something or an article--
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- yes,
but not in the moment.
We have a possibility,
because we can only
live now, to be present.
And that social media--
we can get it in the now.
That's so great.
It's so great.
>>LISA: So the four gifts are
the power of forgiveness--
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, the power
to forgive the unforgivable--
>>LISA: Forgive
the unforgivable.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes-- the power
of unity is the second gift.
The third gift is
the power of healing.
And healing is a process.
A lot of times, we want
to say, it's an event.
I want it to--
give me that shot.
And I'm done with that.
But we know that
our lives-- mm--
probably take a
lot more sometimes.
>>LISA: There is a very big
need for instant healing.
When you're sick-- I want
it just to get better.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: Or if you
hurt yourself--
I just want it to get better.
If you have some type of
a surgery or something--
I just want it to be over.
What is that process?
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, that's
a dis-honoring too--
to understand that
it is a process--
the healing-- our bodies,
our minds, spirits.
And so it's about
getting patient.
But with the modern--
just, fast, fast, fast, move,
moving-- we get into that.
And when we start
to slow that down,
then we'll be able to really
see with clearer vision
and allow the healing
to happen more fully--
all of that much better.
So I think part of it's,
we're undoing that too,
to understand that healing
is a process as well.
>>LISA: Can we still heal
when the devastating things
are still happening?
And I know, I keep
going back to this.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: But could you
heal amidst the trauma
you were going through?
The healing really can't begin
until the trauma is over.
>>SANCHEZ: I think
that's an allusion too.
>>LISA: Tell me.
>>SANCHEZ: So let me just say--
not going into the depths.
But I remember one of the
times when I was being abused
and I was actually being beaten.
And I remember going up to my
room and just really in pain.
And there was blood on my legs.
And I remember
blotting it and trying
to be careful not
to use something
that it would cause a stain.
And the sun came in the window.
It's this little bedroom that
my two sisters and I shared.
And it touched right
where the blood was.
And I remember that.
I had this sense
I was not alone.
And I used to go off
and go to museums,
when they were free,
on the free days,
and looking and imagining.
And I realized, I was not alone.
The spirit of those
artists was there,
letting me know there
were other realities.
I'm talking about
being a little girl.
I think, for all
of us, if we were
to get still to see that even
in the deepest, darkest times--
and I know you've heard
this, and I can't quote
who says this, but it's true--
the light is the brightest.
So that was one of
my darkest times.
And healing was already
happening, saying,
there is another day.
The sun is here.
You are part of
something bigger.
And that's difficult to do when
you're in the depths of that.
But it is possible.
So yes, things are happening.
And solutions are happening.
People are coming together.
And they're doing it in a
way of standing for things--
not against, not about
violence, but about change--
not at all apologetic
about the change.
>>LISA: Wow, that is
absolutely profound.
Thank you for
sharing that story.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: I could see the--
>>SANCHEZ: Oh, it's so--
>>LISA: [INAUDIBLE].
>>SANCHEZ: Yes!
You can still see it.
>>LISA: Yes-- of the sun.
>>SANCHEZ: It's in me.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: That sunbeam
is forever with me.
>>LISA: You've often turned
to the sun for healing.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
That's wonderful.
>>SANCHEZ: Just imagine, if
the next day, you wake up
and there is no
sun-- we all go mad.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah-- yeah.
>>SANCHEZ: See?
So why don't we wake up
every day and say, thank you.
Gratitude.
Because it's here.
We just need to remind
ourselves and each other.
>>LISA: Well, that brings
us to the fourth gift, which
is the gift of hope.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Tell me about that.
>>SANCHEZ: Oh, well, hope
is a wonderful thing.
And right now, it's
being written about.
And it's kind of
argued in saying,
we don't really need hope.
That's just that paralysis.
You just sit there and hope.
No, that's not the hope.
That's not the true hope that
the original instructions
told the indigenous
elders around the world.
Hope in action--
>>LISA: Ah!
>>SANCHEZ: Hope is
an energy source.
Many of the things we've
created happened not because we
could see it from our senses.
But we could imagine it.
We could intuit it.
Spirit whispered in our ear--
whatever it was-- other.
And that's that hope.
>>LISA: I have heard
that, that hope says
that it's not happening or hope
is the absence of it occurring.
And so you're talking
about an energetic hope.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, and
it's a hope in action.
So it moves you.
You're compelled to
move with this hope.
See, I was compelled to move.
The hope came,
for me, in dreams,
in my dreams of a
little girl, of being--
I knew, at age 3
and 4, I was already
dreaming that what I was
going to be when I grew up
was connecting hearts
all over the world.
I didn't know that that was
going to be an organization
development consultant.
But I knew that.
And so it was a pull already.
So by age 16, I'm in college.
And what am I doing?
I'm already studying that.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Can you
give us an example
of how we would find
hope in something?
In maybe an exercise
or somewhere
that you can really practically
teach is how to get to hope?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, and I think
a big one is dreaming.
And I hear a lot of
people-- well, first of all,
they don't give themselves
enough time to sleep.
So they don't dream.
>>LISA: That's true.
>>SANCHEZ: But you can
do waking dreams too.
Like, I think it's not
punishing the small child who
wanders and in their
imagination that-- that's
an important process
that's happening.
And they're starting to
learn that in education too.
But dreaming-- so
I asked people--
when I'm working with adults,
I say, before you go to bed,
just give yourself a couple
minutes to just get present.
And then ask.
Ask yourself, your
inner wisdom--
ask your inner guides, whatever
it is, from whatever belief
system you have, to bring
forth whatever in dream-time.
So I think it's
activating our dreams,
activating our imagination.
Cynicism, doubt--
the danger of doubt
just stops so many
things from happening.
We wouldn't have
these computers.
We wouldn't have a lot of
the different technology
we have, if people just--
oh, well, that can't be.
They dreamed those.
>>LISA: That is true.
Can we go through a couple
of practical exercises
on each of the four gifts?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: So you just
gave us one on hope.
What about a practical
exercise on forgiveness--
forgiving the unforgivable.
>>SANCHEZ: Forgiving
the unforgivable--
I think, on that one,
it is about listening--
listening to yourself,
first and foremost.
Here's the truth
about all these gifts.
Spirit gave it to these
elders so that we could all
remember that we're one.
But the reality is, these
Four Gifts are intimately
interconnected.
You could start wherever.
So for forgiveness,
forgiveness was
starting to listen and be
able to start connecting up.
So I was listening.
First, I didn't trust human
beings-- the two-leggeds-- as
much as I trusted nature.
So it was listening to the
trees, listening to the sun,
just being present to it.
Go outside, if it's a bad work
day, and walk around the block.
It changes everything.
So there is something that
you can do just immediately.
And it begins that
process of forgiving.
And I think, it's very important
to say here, on forgiveness--
part of what stopped
me from forgiving
was I had the wrong
definition of forgiveness.
I thought forgiveness
meant you forget.
meant I was weak.
I thought forgiveness
was meaning
I was betraying my own
identity group, whether it
was Hispanic--
>>LISA: Of course.
>>SANCHEZ: --or Native
American, or a woman.
>>LISA: Or giving permission
for that wrongness to happen.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah-- no.
Forgiveness means you're
just freeing yourself
up from being imprisoned.
And what it really means--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANCHEZ: --is that you
too can still seek justice.
You do right it,
so for yourself--
>>LISA: Thank you for--
>>SANCHEZ: --and for future.
>>LISA: --saying that-- yes.
>>SANCHEZ: So that's
really important.
So there's a step to begin--
so I think, just knowing
what that is and listening.
>>LISA: Forgiveness is
kind of the key that
unlocks all of that.
>>SANCHEZ: It's a huge--
it's a huge path to freedom.
>>LISA: Your voice, your
healing, your action--
all of it.
>>SANCHEZ: Being in
unity with other people--
it's hard to be in total
unity if you're holding back.
Like, I did with my armor.
Like, OK, I'll belong to this
group, but only a little bit.
And then I'm putting
the armor back up.
Because I don't--
>>LISA: Because I
don't really trust you.
>>SANCHEZ: --want
to be hurt-- yeah.
>>LISA: Because I don't-- yes.
>>SANCHEZ: And then
realize-- well, it's
keeping out the good stuff too.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SANCHEZ: And you
don't want that.
And I'm worth that.
You're worth that.
Every being is worthy of love.
And so that begins
that whole process.
>>LISA: That's true.
I love how you call
us the two-leggeds.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, we
are the two-leggeds.
>>LISA: That's a great analogy.
A practical tip on unity--
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, unity--
I think, meditation is
a good one on unity.
Immediately, people
think, well, you
have to be in a crowd to
realize your connectivity.
But just meditate.
And you realize, in that
space, you are so much more.
You connect your
head and your heart.
That's a big one.
I think, right now, people
need to connect their head
and heart.
My uncle-- that same
uncle-- used to say--
one of the things before he
told us the different wisdom,
he'd say, often, the
toughest, but always
the most rewarding
journey in life,
is journey from the heart
to the head and back again
or the head to the
heart and back again.
And he wished many journeys.
That's one to practice.
Get still.
What's happening in my heart?
What's happening in my head?
Connect them--
>>LISA: Back to the heart.
>>SANCHEZ: Meditation-- Yes.
>>LISA: When I watch
the news, I do that.
I've seen these separations of
families at the borders now.
>>SANCHEZ: Oh, it's really hard.
>>LISA: And I could
feel into that.
And it's painful.
But then I could also
send love to that--
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: --and realize that
they will be connected again.
And they are always connected.
And we are always connected to--
in a unity way-- even our lost
loved ones.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, and
people are standing up.
I just was-- all these
governors who said,
we're not sending down our
military or whatever you call--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANCHEZ: They're not
going to go do that.
And other people
were just standing--
>>LISA: People are standing
up and making a difference.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, and saying, no.
We're not going to do that.
And our president changed
this declaration around that
and said he never was.
See, the power of
unity is happening,
in the midst of the darkness.
But if you really put your
actions towards there,
you will see that your
light-- each of us--
it's so strong and
bright, the power
we have to make a
difference in unity.
>>LISA: That's a
fantastic example.
>>SANCHEZ: And
knowing that is huge.
>>LISA: Yes-- yes.
Now, you have a song here that
I want to show to our audience.
And this is the song that
you are chanting and singing
to the four directions.
What is the name of this?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, so
it is a Seneca song.
A friend said that
I could sing this.
And I'm still-- if I
look a little funny--
I'm kind of blurbing
a little bit.
I'm not used to
doing it in public.
And I've begun sharing
this chat with people
that's really powerful.
And what I'm saying is--
I ask, when you listen to
this, to open your heart
and connect to all
those things, beings
you love-- two-leggeds,
four-leggeds, wind,
river, whatever.
Just bring it in.
And as I do this every
morning and every night,
I imagine being connected
to everyone and everything.
And what the words mean
in Seneca is thank you,
thank you, Great Mystery.
Thank you, thank
you, Great Mystery.
That's what it says--
>>LISA: Mm-- beautiful.
>>SANCHEZ: --so
gratitude for being
here and connected to all.
>>LISA: Wow!
I invite you to go through
this song as an exercise.
Close your eyes.
Repeat those words to yourself.
And feel into this
beautiful chant.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- When I sing this
chant, I image the winds
of the four directions--
East, South, West, and North.
And why I image of the
winds is because they remind
me of our connection
to everything,
as they move around
the Earth, touching
everyone and everything.
So thank you for
standing as I sing.
[SINGING IN SENECA]
[END PLAYBACK]
My greatest mystery,
you said, in that.
Thank you.
Thank you--
>>SANCHEZ: Great Mystery.
>>LISA: --Great Mystery.
That really leaves it open
to the wise, the reasons.
And it just says, thank you
to all of that unknown, right?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes,
because we know a lot.
Science teachers a lot.
Our senses know a lot.
And still, we are energy.
We are spirit.
And there is this great mystery
about how this all evolved.
And so it's honoring that--
and open to that wisdom, right?
Open to that wisdom to be
here with all of us right now.
>>LISA: Oh, the great
mystery of the universe--
>>SANCHEZ: --verse-- yes.
>>LISA: Oh, I was going to
the great mysteries of life.
You do lead the way, right?
>>SANCHEZ: It's all of it.
It's all of it.
You got it right.
It's all of that-- yes.
>>LISA: So speaking
of mysteries--
and I want to know your
reason for doing this?
What is your biggest why, Anita?
>>SANCHEZ: I think I've known
since I was really little.
My language, hopefully, has
gotten a little clearer.
But I believe that I'm here
to inspire people to discover
and trust their gifts, so that
they can become a life-giving
connection to all beings--
two-leggeds, four-leggeds,
water-- all of it.
That's what I believe is my why.
And it keeps me going.
It keeps me going to know that
I'm a part of helping people
remember-- the remembering
that we belong and--
>>LISA: Does it--
>>SANCHEZ: --your gifts matter.
>>LISA: Does it
get tough for you?
Are there challenges
in your life?
>>SANCHEZ: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: Still?
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, it's part of--
>>LISA: Well, I mean, you're--
>>SANCHEZ: --being a human.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah, but
the difference is, I
don't stay there very long.
There was a time where
it would just cycle.
And then I'd have that negative
talk and doubt and all that.
Now, it's like,
oh, it's you again.
OK, I embrace it.
And then, we're going.
Let's go.
Too much needs to happen.
>>LISA: There's challenge again.
I know you.
>>SANCHEZ: I know you.
>>LISA: I know you.
And so you can come
along and work it out.
>>LISA: I love it!
>>SANCHEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah, so you
can recognize challenge.
And you can see setback.
And you look at them as
almost personifying them
as, you're a visitor.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: And you can--
>>SANCHEZ: And it's
also that challenge--
it's going to give me strength.
And yes, I don't want
people to have to lift
heavy weights their whole life.
However, that's how we get
a little of our muscle.
So I do know from my
past, from my childhood--
to this day now, I know, I would
not choose a different life.
I believe everything
is forgivable.
I can't think of a
single thing that's not.
>>LISA: Have you
ever thought about--
you wish you were different
or had a different life?
>>SANCHEZ: I do not want that,
because then I wouldn't be who
I am, where I am-- and all the
elders and the connection--
sitting here with
you, and us getting
to impact other people
who are listening,
who want to ignite
that in their life--
no.
No.
>>LISA: I know that you get
to carry on your biggest why
at an incredible event
that's happening in India.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: We're very--
I just want you to share
that with us really quickly.
>>SANCHEZ: Yes, it's
the World Dignity Forum.
And so, underlying a lot of
the things that are happening--
the separation--
is a loss of understanding
that dignity--
the worthiness that all beings
have by virtue of just being.
So in New Delhi will be a
gathering of indigenous elders
from all over the world--
thought leaders, spiritual
leaders, celebrities,
billionaires, philanthropists,
heads of state--
where we are going to come
together and enjoy life
for the three days, be
joyful, identify the problems
and solutions that are working.
It's very solutions oriented--
>>LISA: That are working.
>>SANCHEZ: And
really lift those up.
I almost feel the
vibration of that.
As we do that, we
make those changes.
And it's really wonderful.
And it's seeing what's really
happening all over the world--
the things we don't get to
hear about that are working--
that we need to send
more light, love,
resources to, to make this
world be what it's meant to be,
which is thriving.
>>LISA: That's so important-- a
solution-oriented conference--
>>SANCHEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: --with all of the
leaders of the world and more.
And it's also
broadcast worldwide--
>>SANCHEZ: It is going to be.
>>LISA: --live,
which is fantastic,
through every different
type of social medium.
Thank you so much, Anita.
You are a gift.
>>SANCHEZ: Oh, thank you.
>>LISA: I know you talk
about the four gifts.
But you should be the fifth.
>>SANCHEZ: Thank you so much.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>SANCHEZ: Wonderful to be here.
>>LISA: And I hope
that you can continue
on these gifts in
your life as well.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSICAL TONES]